Guide for getting started with supercomputing (#2164)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/support/tutorials/hpc-quick.md

# Getting started with supercomputing at CSC

You have signed up for your CSC account and first project, and are now ready to
scale up your computing! This page provides guidance for getting started with
using our HPC resources. It is recommended that new users complete the
[CSC Computing Environment course](https://csc-training.github.io/csc-env-eff/),
which provides a more in-depth introduction to using CSC services.

## Available systems

### Puhti

New users are recommended to start working on the
[Puhti supercomputer](../../computing/systems-puhti.md).
Compared to Mahti, it has much more pre-installed software, more GPU nodes, and

> typically more available memory per CPU. Additionally, some Puhti CPU nodes have
> fast local NVMe storage, which is reserved only for GPU nodes on Mahti.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typically more available memory per CPU. Additionally, GPU nodes and some of the CPU nodes
on Puhti have [fast local NVMe storage](../../computing/disk.md#temporary-local-disk-areas).
```

### Mahti

If you know that your computations are highly parallelizable, you should
consider running them on the
[Mahti supercomputer](../../computing/systems-mahti.md).
Compared to Puhti, Mahti has many more CPU nodes and cores per node. Mahti is
intended for computations that are able to effectively utilize at least an
entire CPU node.

Additionally, while Mahti has fewer GPU nodes than Puhti, the A100 GPUs on
Mahti are considerably more powerful than the V100 GPUs on Puhti, which

> makes Mahti also suitable for machine learning applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makes Mahti also suitable for machine learning applications. In contrast to Puhti,
on Mahti only GPU nodes have fast local NVMe storage available.
```

### LUMI

LUMI is one of the fastest supercomputers in the world. It is intended primarily
for running computations that benefit from the large amount of high-performance
GPUs in its LUMI-G hardware partition. Whereas the GPUs on Puhti and Mahti are
manufactured by Nvidia, the LUMI GPUs are made by AMD, so make sure that your

> GPU applications are able to use AMD drivers. LUMI has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GPU applications have been ported to run on AMD GPUs. LUMI has
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm, but not all applications have to be ported, they might natively support AMD GPU? 
I think "are able to run on AMD GPUs" fits better here.

Reviewer: Fair point :+1:

[its own documentation pages](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/).

## Available interfaces

### Web interface

Puhti, Mahti and LUMI each have
[their own web interface](../../computing/webinterface/index.md), which allows
interacting with the supercomputer using a web browser. The web interface is a

> good choice for interactive computing, such as developing code or exploring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
good choice for interactive computing, such as analyzing, exploring
```

and visualizing data. For this purpose, the web interface features multiple
interactive applications, like

> [Visual Studio Code](../../computing/webinterface/vscode.md),
> [Jupyter](../../computing/webinterface/jupyter.md) and
> [RStudio](../../computing/webinterface/rstudio.md). For demanding computation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Jupyter](../../computing/webinterface/jupyter.md) and
[RStudio](../../computing/webinterface/rstudio.md), as well as an
accelerated visualization app for GPU-accelerated visualization and
rendering. For demanding computation,
```

like running full-scale simulations or training neural networks, you will want
to use the command-line interface, as it allows you to schedule your jobs and
allocate more resources.

### Command-line interface

> Effective high-performance computing is based on using the supercomputers'

Reviewer: Not sure what is the best way to formulate this, but do you think some explanation/contrasting like this would make sense?
```suggestion
While the web interfaces are easy to use and a good starting point for using CSC's
supercomputers, the available capacity is limited as they are primarily intended for
interactive usage with low resource requirements. If you need to access more resources
(multiple CPU nodes or GPUs, for example), it is required to switch to using the
text-based Linux command-line interface (CLI) of the supercomputer. While this
may seem as an archaic way of working, it is truly powerful once you get a hang
of it.
```

> Effective high-performance computing is based on using the supercomputers'
> [Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md) through a text-based interface.

Reviewer: Not sure what is the best way to formulate this, but do you think some explanation/contrasting like this would make sense?
```suggestion
While the web interfaces are easy to use and a good starting point for using CSC's
supercomputers, the available capacity is limited as they are primarily intended for
interactive usage with low resource requirements. If you need to access more resources
(multiple CPU nodes or GPUs, for example), it is required to switch to using the
text-based Linux command-line interface (CLI) of the supercomputer. While this
may seem as an archaic way of working, it is truly powerful once you get a hang
of it.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the web interfaces are easy to use and a good starting point for using CSC's
supercomputers, they are primarily intended for
interactive usage with low resource requirements. If you need to access more resources
(multiple CPU nodes or GPUs, for example), or if you do not need the interactivity anymore (you can submit your job and only get back once the results are ready) it is a good idea to switch to using the
text-based Linux command-line interface (CLI) of the supercomputer. While this
may seem as an archaic way of working, it is truly powerful once you get a hang
of it.
```
A slight adaption suggestion for @rkronberg suggestion

intended for computations that are able to effectively utilize at least an
entire CPU node.

Additionally, while Mahti has fewer GPU nodes than Puhti, the A100 GPUs on
Mahti are considerably more powerful than the V100 GPUs on Puhti, which
makes Mahti also suitable for machine learning applications. In contrast to Puhti,
on Mahti only GPU nodes have fast local NVMe storage available.

### LUMI

LUMI is one of the fastest supercomputers in the world. It is intended primarily
for running computations that benefit from the large amount of high-performance
GPUs in its LUMI-G hardware partition. Whereas the GPUs on Puhti and Mahti are
manufactured by Nvidia, the LUMI GPUs are made by AMD, so make sure that your
GPU applications are able to run on AMD GPUs. LUMI has
[its own documentation pages](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/).

## Available interfaces

### Web interface

Puhti, Mahti and LUMI each have
[their own web interface](../../computing/webinterface/index.md), which allows
interacting with the supercomputer using a web browser. The web interface is a
good choice for interactive computing, such as analyzing, exploring

> and visualizing data. For this purpose, the web interface features multiple
> interactive applications, like
> [Visual Studio Code](../../computing/webinterface/vscode.md),
> [Jupyter](../../computing/webinterface/jupyter.md) and
> [RStudio](../../computing/webinterface/rstudio.md), as well as an
> [accelerated visualization app](../../computing/webinterface/accelerated-visualization.md)
> for GPU-accelerated visualization and rendering. For demanding computation,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and visualizing data. For this purpose, the web interface features multiple
interactive applications, like
[Visual Studio Code](../../computing/webinterface/vscode.md),
[Jupyter](../../computing/webinterface/jupyter.md) and
[RStudio](../../computing/webinterface/rstudio.md). In addition it provides a full [desktop environment](../../computing/webinterface/desktop/) with software that provides a Graphical User Interface (GUI) as well as an
[accelerated visualization app](../../computing/webinterface/accelerated-visualization.md)
for GPU-accelerated visualization and rendering. For demanding computation,
```

Jupyter and RStudio, are easy to use and thus a good starting point for using
CSC supercomputers, their computing capacity is limited to relatively
low-resource interactive usage. If you need access to more resources (e.g.
multiple CPU nodes or GPUs) or if you require efficiency over interactivity,
it is a good idea to switch to using the text-based command-line interface to
interact directly with the supercomputer's
[Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md). While this way of working may
seem archaic, it is truly powerful once you get used to it.

The main benefit of using the CLI is getting to
[submit your computations as batch jobs](../../computing/running/getting-started.md)
to the SLURM job scheduler. Requesting a large amount of resources
for an interactive application like Jupyter typically entails having to wait for
several hours before finally logging in to manually run the job. This is
both inconvenient and wasteful, as your interactive session may start at a time
when you are unable to access your workstation, which means that several hours
of potential runtime can go unused. When you submit a batch job to SLURM, your

> job is run automatically when the requested resources become available.

Reviewer 2: Unsure about this paragraph. It is not quite convincing, but also do not have a better idea right now... 

Maybe rather than that you might get the resources when you are unable to access the workstation it could focus on that you really do not have to be on your workstation while the job is running, ie there does not need to be any connection between your computer and the supercomputer?

Somewhere here could also be mentioned that running batch job instead of interactively running stuff requires some adjustment, ie level of automation, which may seem tedious but in addition to "not having to care while it is running", also brings the benefit of making the job more reproducible?

Author: "The CLI allows you to submit your computations as batch jobs to the SLURM job scheduler, which runs them as soon as the requested resources are available. In practice, this means that getting work done does not necessitate being tied to your workstation. While setting up this automation can require some more planning on your part, in the long run it makes it more reproducible both to yourself and other parties, such as reviewers and collaborators."

You can access the command-line interface either by
using the [shell applications](../../computing/webinterface/shell.md)
featured in the web interface (Windows, Linux or macOS) or by
[using an SSH client on your own workstation](../../computing/connecting.md)
(Linux or macOS).

## Available resources

### Scientific software

Even if your computations are not highly parallelizable, you can benefit from
running them on a CSC supercomputer by making use of the variety of useful
[scientific computing software](../../apps/index.md) that is available.
Puhti is especially meritorious in this regard, having over a hundred
pre-installed programs.

CSC systems use [environment modules](../../computing/modules.md) for
managing software environments. These modules cover everything from
[compilers](../../computing/installing.md#compiling) to
[programming languages](../../apps/by_discipline.md#mathematics-and-statistics)
to workflow utilities like
[Nextflow](../../apps/nextflow.md) and [Snakemake](../../apps/snakemake.md).

> Running most of our software requires using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running most of the software installed on the supercomputers efficiently requires using the
```
It's not quite "ours", unsure about the efficiently (it could help the point of using CLI over interactive? )...

[basics of the Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md).

While the pre-installed software covers a wide variety of use cases, it is not
uncommon to need to
[carry out installations of your own](../../computing/installing/index.md).
Luckily, we have various
compilers,
[high-performance libraries](../../computing/installing/hpc-libraries.md) and
other utilities to facilitate this.

You may also wish to develop your own scripts instead of using existing
software. It is most efficient to start writing and testing your code on your
own device, since running it on a shared system (which supercomputers
invariably are) inevitably introduces some overhead. You should only start
running your scripts on a supercomputer once you are ready for testing them on a
larger scale or using specific resources like GPUs.

### Supercomputer storage

High-performance computing consumes and generates large amounts of data.
Using CSC services for HPC thus requires a basic understanding of the
[supercomputer disk areas](../../computing/disk.md). Note that the none of the
disk areas are intended for long-term preservation of datasets or experimental
results. For that purpose, we offer the cloud-based

> [Allas object storage service](../../data/Allas/introduction.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Allas object storage service](../../data/Allas/introduction.md).
We provide [multiple ways to transfer your data between the supercomputer and object storage](../../data/Allas/accessing_allas.md). 
```

# Getting started with supercomputing at CSC

> You have signed up for your CSC account and first project, and are now ready to
> scale up your computing! This page provides guidance for getting started with
> using our HPC resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have signed up for your [CSC account](../../accounts/how-to-create-new-user-account.md)
and first [project](../../accounts/how-to-create-new-project.md), and are now ready to
scale up your computing! This page provides guidance for getting started with
using our HPC resources.
```

> It is recommended that new users complete the CSC Computing Environment course,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended that new users complete the *CSC Computing Environment* course,
```

> which provides an in-depth introduction to CSC services. The next teaching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which provides an in-depth introduction to CSC services. The next live teaching
```

instance can be found in the
[CSC training calendar](https://csc.fi/en/trainings/training-calendar/).
A [self-learning implementation](https://csc.fi/en/training-calendar/csc-computing-environment-self-learning/)
is also available. The

> [practical exercises](https://csc-training.github.io/csc-env-eff/) are
> accessible without having to sign up, and quite useful by themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[course materials](https://csc-training.github.io/csc-env-eff/) are
accessible without having to sign up, and are very useful by themselves.
```

Reviewer 2: Us saying ourselves that "they are useful" feels a bit weird. Maybe we could rather describe how it's useful? 

Maybe "... can be accessed without login via our GitHub page (link). The materials are self-learning ready, i.e. you can read through the materials on your own time and even do the exercises (using your own CSC account and project); solutions are provided. " or something along those lines?

Reviewer: Yes, I agree, but on the other hand I would not like to extend the page too much anymore. It is already becoming much longer than I initially envisioned.

Author: I think that since that since the option of checking out just the exercises without signing up for the course is offered as an additional resource rather than something we would strongly want the users to do, it is not necessary to motivate why the material is useful. Also I would imagine that especially new users would be more or less inclined to trust CSC docs when it says that something is useful : )

Author: "The [exercise materials](https://csc-training.github.io/csc-env-eff/) are accessible without having to sign up, and are very useful by themselves, since they provide practical examples of working in our computing environment."

> ## Available systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Which system should I use?
```

> !!! note "Terms of use"
>     Note that in order to use any of the systems, you must first accept its
>     terms of use in the MyCSC service.

Reviewer: This is in most cases not needed for Puhti, Mahti and Allas anymore. Remove to avoid confusion.
```suggestion
```

### Puhti

New users are recommended to start working on the
[Puhti supercomputer](../../computing/available-systems.md#puhti).

> Compared to Mahti, it has much more pre-installed software, more GPU nodes, and
> typically more available memory per CPU. Additionally, GPU nodes and some of the CPU nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to Mahti, it has much more [pre-installed software](../../apps/by_system.md#puhti), more GPU nodes, and
typically more available memory per CPU core. Additionally, GPU nodes and some CPU nodes
```

on Puhti have [fast local NVMe storage](../../computing/disk.md#temporary-local-disk-areas).

### Mahti

If you know that your computations are highly parallelizable, you should
consider running them on the
[Mahti supercomputer](../../computing/available-systems.md#mahti).
Compared to Puhti, Mahti has many more CPU nodes and cores per node. Mahti is
intended for computations that are able to effectively utilize at least an
entire CPU node.

Additionally, while Mahti has fewer GPU nodes than Puhti, the A100 GPUs on Mahti
are considerably more powerful than the V100 GPUs on Puhti, which makes Mahti

> also suitable for large-scale machine learning applications. In contrast to Puhti,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also suitable for large-scale [machine learning](ml-guide.md) applications. In contrast to Puhti,
```

only GPU nodes have fast local NVMe storage available on Mahti.

### LUMI

The [LUMI supercomputer](../../computing/available-systems.md#lumi)
is one of the fastest in the world. It is intended primarily
for running computations that benefit from the large amount of high-performance
GPUs in its LUMI-G hardware partition. Whereas the GPUs on Puhti and Mahti are
manufactured by Nvidia, the LUMI GPUs are made by AMD, so make sure that your
GPU applications are able to run on AMD GPUs. LUMI has
[its own documentation pages](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

!!! note "On supercomputing"
    CSC supercomputers offer resources that, when properly used, are well-beyond
    what the most sophisticated consumer devices are capable of. However, *you are
    not the only one using them*. On your personal workstation, you have, in
    principle, immediate access to resources. On a supercomputer, which is a shared
    system, you must typically queue for them, since their demand tends to be higher
    than their supply. See our [usage policy](../../computing/usage-policy.md)
    for more information.

    It is also worth keeping in mind that running your computations on a
    supercomputer only improves performance if you play to its strengths.
    Supercomputers are powerful because they allow for
    [parallel computing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing).
    If your code is not written to take advantage of multiple CPU cores, or one or
    more GPUs, there might be no benefit over running it on your own workstation.
    However, high memory and/or storage requirements, as well as availability of pre-installed
    software and licenses are other factors which may make using CSC supercomputers
    attractive for you.

```

> ## Available interfaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to access CSC supercomputers?
```

### Web interface

Puhti, Mahti and LUMI each have
[their own web interface](../../computing/webinterface/index.md), which allows
interacting with the supercomputer through a web browser. The web interface is a
good choice for interactive computing, such as analyzing, exploring
and visualizing data. For this purpose, the web interface features multiple
interactive applications, like
[Visual Studio Code](../../computing/webinterface/vscode.md),
[Jupyter](../../computing/webinterface/jupyter.md) and
[RStudio](../../computing/webinterface/rstudio.md). In addition, it provides a
[desktop environment](../../computing/webinterface/desktop.md) featuring
software with graphical user interfaces (GUIs), as well as an
[accelerated visualization app](../../computing/webinterface/accelerated-visualization.md)
for GPU-accelerated visualization and rendering. For demanding computation,
like running full-scale simulations or training neural networks, you should use
the command-line interface, since it allows you to access more resources and
schedule your jobs.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- [Puhti web interface](https://www.puhti.csc.fi)
- [Mahti web interface](https://www.mahti.csc.fi)
- [LUMI web interface](https://www.lumi.csc.fi)

```

### Command-line interface

While many of the interactive applications in the web interface, such as
Jupyter and RStudio, are easy to use and thus a good starting point for using
CSC supercomputers, their computing capacity is limited to relatively
low-resource interactive usage. If you need access to more resources (e.g.
multiple CPU nodes or GPUs) or if your work requires efficiency over
interactivity, it is a good idea to switch to using the text-based command-line
interface to interact directly with the supercomputer's
[Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md). While this way of working may
seem archaic, it is truly powerful once you get used to it.

The CLI allows you to 
[submit your computations as batch jobs](../../computing/running/getting-started.md)
to the SLURM job scheduler, which runs them as soon as the requested resources
are available. In practice, this means that getting work done does not
necessitate being tied to your workstation. While setting up this automation

> can require some more planning on your part, in the long run it makes it more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can require some more planning on your part, in the long run it makes it more efficient and
```

reproducible both to yourself and other parties, such as reviewers and collaborators.

You can access the command-line interface either by
using the [shell applications](../../computing/webinterface/shell.md)
featured in the web interface (Windows, Linux or macOS) or by
[using an SSH client on your own workstation](../../computing/connecting.md)
(Linux or macOS).

> ## Available resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to work with software and data?
```

### Scientific software

> Even if your computations are not highly parallelizable, you can benefit from
> running them on a CSC supercomputer by making use of the variety of useful
> [scientific computing software](../../apps/index.md) that is available.
> Puhti is especially distinguished in this regard, having over a hundred
> pre-installed programs.
> 
> CSC systems use [environment modules](../../computing/modules.md) for
> managing software environments. These modules cover everything from
> [compilers](../../computing/installing.md#compiling) to
> [programming languages](../../apps/by_discipline.md#mathematics-and-statistics)
> to workflow utilities like
> [Nextflow](../../apps/nextflow.md) and [Snakemake](../../apps/snakemake.md).
> Effectively running most of the installed software requires using the
> [command-line interface](#command-line-interface), so it is extremely useful to
> have a solid grasp of the
> [basics of the Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md).
> 
> While the pre-installed software covers a wide variety of use cases, it is not
> uncommon to need to
> [carry out installations of your own](../../computing/installing.md).
> Luckily, we have various
> compilers,
> [high-performance libraries](../../computing/hpc-libraries.md) and
> other utilities to facilitate this.
> 
> You may also wish to develop your own scripts instead of using existing
> software. It is most efficient to start writing and testing your code on your
> own device, since running it on a shared system (which supercomputers
> invariably are) inevitably introduces some overhead. You should only start
> running your scripts on a supercomputer once you are ready for testing them on a
> larger scale or using specific resources like GPUs.
> 
> !!! note "Checking for availability"
>     If you have a piece of scientific software in mind, it is quite probable
>     that we have it installed on Puhti. You can search for software using the
>     command `module spider <module-name>`. Most often the name of the software
>     module is simply the name of the software, and even if your search query
>     does not match the module name exactly, the search is case-insensitive and
>     supports partial matches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A variety of useful [scientific computing software](../../apps/index.md) are
available on CSC supercomputers.
Puhti is especially distinguished in this regard, having over a hundred
pre-installed programs. Our application pages include batch job script examples
and guidelines for running the pre-installed software efficiently on CSC
supercomputers. We highly recommend using them as a starting point!

CSC supercomputers use [environment modules](../../computing/modules.md) for
managing software environments. These modules cover everything from
[compilers](../../computing/installing.md#compiling) to
[programming languages](../../apps/by_discipline.md#mathematics-and-statistics)
and workflow utilities like
[Nextflow](../../apps/nextflow.md) and [Snakemake](../../apps/snakemake.md).
Running most of the installed software efficiently requires using the
[command-line interface](#command-line-interface), so it is extremely useful to
have a working knowledge of the
[basics of the Linux operating system](./env-guide/index.md).

While the pre-installed software cover a wide variety of use cases, it is also
possible to install your own applications on CSC supercomputers. The process
often differs from carrying out installations on your own computer, so make
sure to familiarize yourself with
[our installation instructions](../../computing/installing.md). For compiling
HPC applications we have various [compilers](../../computing/installing.md#compiling),
[high-performance libraries](../../computing/hpc-libraries.md) and
other utilities available to facilitate this. Note that some installations, such
as complex Python environments, benefit from
[containerization](../../computing/containers/overview.md).

You may also wish to develop your own scripts and programs instead of using existing
software. It is most efficient to start writing and testing your code on your
own device, since running it on a shared system (which supercomputers
invariably are) inevitably introduces some overhead. You should only start
running your scripts on a supercomputer once you are ready for testing them on a
larger scale or using specific resources like GPUs.

!!! note "Checking for availability"
    If you have a piece of scientific software in mind, it is quite probable
    that we have it installed on Puhti. Besides browsing Docs CSC, you can search
    for software on the command-line using the command `module spider <module name>`.
    Most often the name of the software module is simply the name of the software,
    and even if your search query does not match the module name exactly, the
    search is case-insensitive and supports partial matches.
```

> ### Supercomputer storage
> 
> High-performance computing consumes and generates large amounts of data.
> Using CSC services for HPC thus requires a basic understanding of the
> [supercomputer disk areas](../../computing/disk.md) as well as the principles
> of [managing data on them](./clean-up-data.md). Note that the none of the
> disk areas are intended for long-term preservation of datasets or experimental
> results. For that purpose, we offer the cloud-based
> [Allas object storage service](../../data/Allas/introduction.md). Allas supports
> multiple options for
> [transferring your data to and from object storage](../../data/Allas/accessing_allas.md).
> 
> [Moving data](../../data/moving/index.md) between a supercomputer and a local
> workstation is made easy by using the
> [web interface file browser](../../data/moving/web-interface.md) or a
> text-based file transfer tool like [scp](../../data/moving/scp.md) or
> [rsync](../../data/moving/rsync.md). You can also use the
> [Linux wget utility](../../data/moving/wget.md) to download data to
> a supercomputer directly from a website or FTP server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Data storage

CSC supercomputers provide various disk areas for different data storage
purposes. The *project-based* shared storage can be found under `/scratch/<project>`.
This folder is shared by *all users* in a project and has a default quota of
1 TB.

Please note that the **scratch disk is not meant for long-term data storage**
and, on Puhti, files that have not been used for 180 days will be automatically
removed. We recommend the
[Allas object storage service](../../data/Allas/introduction.md) for storing
research data that is not actively used on the supercomputers. See
[guidelines for managing data on Puhti and Mahti scratch disks](clean-up-data.md)
for more information. Also note that sensitive data must not be processed or
stored on CSC supercomputers. For this purpose we have separate
[sensitive data services](../../data/sensitive-data/index.md).

CSC supercomputers also have a persistent project-based storage with a default
quota of 50 GB. It is located under `/projappl/<project>` and recommended, for
example, for own software installations. Additionally, each user can store up
to 10 GB of data in their personal home directory (`$HOME`).

[Moving data](../../data/moving/index.md) between a supercomputer and a local
workstation is made easy by using the
[web interface file browser](../../data/moving/web-interface.md) or
command-line-based file transfer tools like [scp](../../data/moving/scp.md) and
[rsync](../../data/moving/rsync.md). You can also use the
[Linux wget utility](../../data/moving/wget.md) to download data to
a supercomputer directly from a website or FTP server.

!!! note "CSC does not back up your data!"
    None of the disk areas are automatically backed up by CSC. This means that
    data accidentally deleted by the user cannot be recovered in any way. To
    avoid unintended data loss, make sure to perform regular backups yourself,
    for example to Allas or your own organization's storage systems.

## Useful links

Browse the navigation or use the search function to find more information about
using CSC's HPC services. The tabs below contain also direct links to pages
that we think are particularly useful when getting started with supercomputing
at CSC.

=== "User accounts and projects"
    - [Creating a user account](../../accounts/how-to-create-new-user-account.md)
    - [Creating](../../accounts/how-to-create-new-project.md) or
      [joining a project](../../accounts/how-to-add-members-to-project.md)
    - [Adding service access to a project](../../accounts/how-to-add-service-access-for-project.md)
    - [Billing](../../accounts/billing.md) and
      [how to apply for billing units](../../accounts/how-to-apply-for-billing-units.md)
    - [How to change password](../../accounts/how-to-change-password.md)
    - [CSC's self-service customer portal MyCSC](https://my.csc.fi)

=== "Computing"
    - [Overview](../../computing/index.md)
    - [Usage policy](../../computing/usage-policy.md)
    - [ Connecting to CSC supercomputers with SSH](../../computing/connecting.md)
      and [using the web interfaces](../../computing/webinterface/connecting.md)
    - [Running batch jobs](../../computing/running/getting-started.md) and
      [available batch job partitions](../../computing/running/batch-job-partitions.md)
    - [Pre-installed applications](../../apps/index.md) and
      [how install own software](../../computing/installing.md)
    - [LUMI user guide](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/)

=== "Training materials and tutorials"
    - [*CSC Computing Environment* course materials](https://csc-training.github.io/csc-env-eff/)
    - [Linux basics tutorial](../tutorials/env-guide/index.md)
    - [Machine learning guide](ml-guide.md)
    - [Using Python on CSC supercomputers](python-usage-guide.md)
    - [Managing data on Puhti and Mahti scratch disks](clean-up-data.md)
    - [Other tutorials](index.md) and
      [training materials](../training-material.md)

=== "Support"
    - [Frequently asked questions](../faq/index.md)
    - [CSC Service Desk](../contact.md)
```

> ### Powerful processing
> 
> CSC supercomputers offer resources that, when properly used, are well-beyond
> what the most sophisticated consumer devices are capable of. However, you are
> not the only one using them. On your personal workstation, you have, in
> principle, immediate access to resources. On a supercomputer, which is a shared
> system, you must typically queue for them, since their demand tends to be higher
> than their supply. Resources are allocated using the
> [SLURM batch job system](../../computing/running/getting-started.md).
> Jobs are submitted to
> [batch job partitions](../../computing/running/batch-job-partitions.md),
> which are distinct groupings of the nodes that make up a supercomputer.
> Each partition has its particular resources and limitations, and it is helpful
> to be aware of the differences.
> 
> !!! note "On supercomputing"
> 
>     It is worth keeping in mind that running your computations on a
>     supercomputer only improves performance if you play to its strengths.
>     Supercomputers are powerful because they allow for
>     [parallel computing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing).
>     If your code is not written to take advantage of multiple CPUs, or one or
>     more GPUs, there is no benefit over running it on your own workstation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> # Getting started with supercomputing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Getting started with supercomputing at CSC
```

You have signed up for your CSC account and first project, and are now ready to
scale up your computations! This page is intended to give you some idea of what
to expect from your journey into the exciting world of high-performance
computing.

## Which supercomputer to use?

Projects may have access to multiple supercomputers. New users are recommended
to start working on the Puhti supercomputer, which caters to a wide range of
use cases. In time, you may find that you need more extensive parallelization

> options, in which case you may wish to run jobs on Mahti.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
options, in which case you may wish to run jobs on Mahti or LUMI.
```
?

Author: The supercomputer section is now more extensive and includes LUMI

## Which interface to use?

### Web interface

There are multiple ways to run computations on CSC supercomputers. The Puhti
and Mahti web interfaces offer a beginner-friendly environment for working with
supercomputers. The web interface includes various interactive applications like
Jupyter, RStudio and Virtual Studio Code, which are useful for developing code
and exploring data.

### Command-line interface

Because of the considerable scale of both data and processing involved in
HPC, you might rather quickly find yourself in need of tools that are more
efficient and powerful than those offered by the graphical web interface. 
Effective use of supercomputers is based on running Unix commands in a
text-based interface. Learning to interact with CSC devices in this way
is a crucial step towards serious supercomputing.

> For Linux and macOS, the most natural way of using command-line tools
> is by opening a terminal and creating a remote SSH connection to a
> supercomputer. Windows users do not have access to a Unix-like terminal, so the
> recommended approach is using the login shell available in the supercomputer web
> interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The easiest access to a command line interface on the supercomputer is 
provided by the login shell available in the supercomputer web interface.  
For Linux and macOS, opening a terminal and creating a remote SSH 
connection (which needs to be set up beforehand) to a
supercomputer is a convenient alternative. Windows users do not directly have 
access to a Unix-like terminal, but apart from the supercomputer web
interface, there are also tools that can enable a direct remote SSH connection. 
```
A suggestion for making it more "webinterface for all". 
Setting up SSH keys can be a confusing first step.
Maybe links could be added to SSH setup and tools for windows?

Author: I think it might be best not to confuse new users with SSH instructions for Windows. I now list the shell apps as the first option and link to the appropriate documentation

## General guidelines

> ### Developing code

Reviewer 2: Should here the first step be to develop on own computer which after all in many cases is the most convenient? It could then list reasons to move to away from that, ie need for GPU, need for more memory/CPU for full scale tests etc?

Author: Good point! I did manage to squeeze that in :)

Developing code is best done in interactive jobs run in the `interactive`,
`test` and `gputest` partitions. These partitions have the shortest queuing
times, which makes it easy to debug code with many quick successive runs.
Web interface applications like Jupyter can be useful for developing code, since
it is easy to test changes made to individual blocks of code without running the
entire script from the beginning. However, once you know your code works, you

> should consider running it as a batch job.

Reviewer 2: Here, there could maybe also already be a mention about "running a script on supercomputer does not necessarily speed it up, you need to make the resources available to the code by using tools that support multi CPU/GPU" etc ? In a nicer sentence of course ;) For expectation management.
